In this final bonus section we're going to be putting everything that we've learned together by building
a clone of Twitter dot com.
Now we're not going to recreate absolutely every feature of Twitter that will take a very long time
but we're going to recreate the core experience.
So we're going to allow people to of course log in and sign up and view public tweets and then search
tweets and post their own tweets potentially more interestingly.
We're going to be building this site in a slightly different way to how we've built sites before which
is closer to what's known as the m the C framework or Model View Controller.
You may have heard of this but if not it's actually pretty straightforward.
The model is the data and data management aspect of the website which is essentially the database and
the essential interactions with it.
The view is the user interface.
So that will be the HMO for the various files for each page of our site and the controller is the functionality
of our site which we'll be writing in BHP.
So the MVC framework essentially tries to keep each these separate for the usual reasons that it makes
your code easier to maintain and more logical in its structure.
So for once I'm not necessarily going to recommend that you have a go at creating Twitter dotcom yourself
although of course you are very welcome to.
And I'd love to see the results but this time I gently advise following along and just seeing this process
of creating a reasonably complex Web site in this way.
OK ready to go.
Let's do it.
So I'm going to start with creating the file space in fire FTB so I'll create a new directory I'm in
complete web developer course dot com here and this is going to be twelve
and then I'm going to create a main file called index dot BHP and this is going to be the central point
of our complete Web site.
So every page will be generated from index top BHP.
Then I'm going to create a directory called views and inside the views directory where we're going to
store the header and footer files for the site as well as the files for each individual page.
And finally we're going to have a file called functions dot BHP where most of the code for our site
i.e. the controller part of MVC is going to set.
OK.
So that's our MVC setup.
We haven't really created the data structure yet.
So let's just jump over to the control panel to create a database to do just that.
So down in my askew l databases
I'll just call it Twitter and generate a password and create all right we're going to leave that for
the moment and I'm going to start by setting up my index stop BHP file.
So command I to open that up and for once we're likely to be working with more than one file at once.
So I'm actually going to bring in the menu here which will allow us to view several files at once and
switch between them.
There's likely a way that you can do that on your text editor as well.
Just try opening more than one file at once and likely you'll get some kind of option either down the
left or along the top which will allow you to switch between those files very easily.
So remember our index top BHP file is going to be where all of our pages are generated and display to
the user just before we do that though I'm going to do a quick hi there.
Save that and just make sure that everything is connected up okay.
So we should be able to access this via complete web developer course dot com slash content slash twelve
Twitter and then claim that that would get wonderful let's jump back over to our text editor and think
about how we're going to structure this index top BHP file.
We're going to start by beginning our bit of BHP and then we'll likely be adding things as we go along.
But the first thing I'm going to be is include
functions top BHP.
So this is currently empty but that's where we're going to include all the functions for our site.
And then we're going to want to include three files which I haven't created yet.
But essentially we're going to want to include from the views folder a header top BHP file.
We're going to want to include a main content part of each page which for the moment I'm just going
to include views slash home.
BHP will create these in a moment and then will include views slash footer top BHP.
And this is then how our site is going to be structured.
So all the actual content is going to be and headed up BHP footed up HP and a number of other files
one for each of the main pages of our web app.
So let's say that and then go and create these three files to back in five FTE people go into views
and then create headed up BHP will create fitted up BHP and we'll create hope.
Top BHP and then I'm gonna open all three of those up using command o control low in windows and then
let's get creating as we're creating a Twitter clone here.
It seems only reasonable to use twitter bootstrap as we're very comfortable with anyway.
So as before I'm gonna be using the version for Alpha.
You can use the full version for it if it's available when you're watching this video and I'm gonna
go over that see documentation again and introduction and scroll down to get the starter template.
Now the header part of this is going to go down as far as body they're
so I'm going to copy that into my header top BHP file so notice I've called this a dot BHP file because
we may need to put some BHP in it but at the moment it's essentially just an HCM l document and then
for now we'll just put hello world into home dot BHP and then
we'll put the fitted up page page scripts just then
okay let's have a look.
Wonderful.
So if we look at the source of that by controller right clicking and view page source you can see we've
got the header H2 AML there then we've got the main content and then we've got outfitter wonderful.
So that's essentially our MVC setup but of course in its current form it doesn't do very much.
So in this video I'm going to take us as far as having the sign up and log in and log out sections working
that will then give you a great framework to work with if you want to create a site like this in a similar
way in the future.
So let's get a nav bar up and running let's find the nav bar in components
and there it is say in that bar we want something fairly simple here.
That first option is pretty close to what we want so let's copy that code
into our headed up BHP file
and we'll put it after body there.
So let's take a look and there it is.
Okay.
Wonderful.
So I'm not particularly worried about styling.
We're all about function in this example.
But let's then
just change the main name there to Twitter and we'll change the link to the home page which for us is
that full thing there normally it would just be a slash or something to the route of the domain name
by here because we're in a sub directory we'll use that and then we don't need a home link.
So I'm going to get rid of that and then I'm gonna have
your timeline as being one of the three so that's where the user can view all the tweets of the people
that they are following
we'll have your tweets and we'll have
profiles.
In fact I'll call that public profile so this will be whether they can view the list of users on the
site and then choose to view their tweets if they want and the links here.
I'm going to work with query strings.
So here we're going to have page equals timeline here we'll have page equals your tweets
and here we'll have page is equal to a public profiles and we can create those pages later on.
And then here we want to allow the user to log in or sign up.
So let's get rid of the search option here
and we'll make this button.
Log in slash.
Sign up OK.
Let's take a look.
Column that looks great.
I'm just going to add a very quick contain a div to our hello world and I'm also gonna change that to
home page so we'll have a div with a class of container.
And for now we'll just have home page in there.
And then for the footer
I'm going to have
a footer there which is just going to have a simple paragraph with a copyright symbol which we get from
and copy
and I'll just call it my website 2016.
There we go.
Now that gives us the copyright symbol there which isn't great but in one of the examples here
can have a look we've got a sticky footer which adds a footer to the bottom of the viewport
which I'll just resize the browser window so you can see that there it is so let's view source and add
that.
So we've got a few custom styles to achieve that.
Let's copy all of those into our own
CSX file which I'll put here
to create file and we'll just have styles dot CSX
open that up as well.
As always we want to keep everything as separate as possible so we'll keep all our styles in their own
document and then if we just save that and then back in headed up the HP link to that style sheet so
I'll do that here using link rail is equal to style sheet and then a tariff
and we'll get this
link has a full link.
I think
like that so the whole link and then styles don't see SS
and then when we refresh that we can see we've got a change there but it hasn't applied to the footer
yet because we haven't added the class of footer to Alpha to let's take a look.
There we go.
Wonderful.
So I'll just add a quick container div
to the footer content
and we go want to get everything laid out nicely.
There we go.
That looks much better and we could include some links here if we wanted as well.
Let's just have a quick look at the effect that it's had on the home page.
Then we might want to get rid of some of these styles.
Here we go.
Yes.
I'm gonna get rid of that custom CSX at the bottom that great.
So now let's get our log in and sign up working.
We're going to do that using a modal which we saw way back in the bootstrap section which is essentially
a nice looking pop up
we can see it in action here.
So it looks like that.
Let's see our live demo to remind us how it works.
There we go.
So we can have our sign up or log in form in the modal
so let's put our mail down in the footer
BHP file and we'll put it just before the end of the body here member That's gonna be hidden by default
and only displayed when we need it and we can make that happen using data toggle and data target on
our button so let's grab our headed up BHP to edit the button and here's our button.
So let's add the data target is my model and data toggle is modal and that should now make that modal
pop up when we click the log in sign up button.
But it doesn't.
I suspect that's because put it up BHP hasn't saved.
So let's try that again refresh log in and sign up.
There we go.
And what's actually going on there is that when we click that it's opening up the model but then refreshing
the page because it's submitting the form which we no longer need.
So let's fix that in a couple of ways.
In headed up BHP will change form to div.
Given that this is actually a form anymore it's just a button and we'll get rid of the tape is equal
to submit from the button as well that shit get disappearing nicely for us.
There we go.
Now let's add a log in form to our model so we'll change the title here in the modal from modal title
to log in and we'll add our form to log in here.
Let's get that from Twitter components forms
and let's see if we can find a super simple log in form.
They should do the job
so our first label is gonna be email
place holder will be email address
and we'll call that email type is text effect or change the type to email
I can be email and then we'll have label for password
spell password correctly type is equal to password I.D.
password and then place holder can just be password and then the button here becomes a log in button
and I'll leave the count the closed button there in case they change their minds.
Okay let's have a look now okay.
Looks great.
Of course the user might not want to log in.
So let's give them an option to switch to sign up instead.
I'll do that here and I'll see how it looks with just a simple link.
Which will give an idea of I'll call it toggle log in
and we'll have a text as sign up then.
Let's have a look.
There we go.
So all I'm gonna change here when they click the sign up link I'm gonna change log in to sign up up
here and I'm gonna change log in to sign up down there and I'll change sign up back to log in as well.
And the final thing that we'll have in our form here is a small hidden input which will keep track of
whether we're on log in mode or sign up mode.
So I'll call this name is equal to log in active
and the value by default will be 1 because log in will be active by default.
Okay.
So let's get our log in toggling sorted for the moment.
I'm just gonna write the javascript directly into footer that BHP but we will switch this to a separate
dot J.S. file before we finish.
So we want some code to run when the toggle log in button is clicked
and we want that to be a function
and for now I'm just going to alert high to make sure that everything's connected up bright that we
get while we're here actually.
I'm going to add a little bit of a margin to the right of sign up just so it's a little bit removed
from the close button let's do that over in styles dot CSX.
I'll put these at the top so toggle log in so we'll have a padding right.
Oh let's say 15 pixels and let's refresh that.
Have a look.
Yeah.
That's better.
OK so we want to find out whether we're in logging mode or not so let's give our logging active an I.D.
as well be the same idea.
Just log in active and then we can look to see if the log in active
input has a value.
Of 1
then that means we're in logging mode.
So as usual I'm just going to do a check
to see if that is correct.
Okay.
It does appear to be.
So if that's the case we now want to switch to sign up mode.
So first off let's change log in active dot vow to zero so that we're not in log in active mode anymore.
And then I'm going to change the idea here to log in modal title
and then we'll change
log in modal title HMO to sign up
then we'll take out a button down here give that an idea
I'll call it log in sign up button
and then we want to take that
and change the HDMI all to
sign up and I think finally we want to change the toggle log in HDMI l I can select that from their
to log in
so that should change everything from a log in mode to a sign up mode let's have a look.
There we go.
So now I've changed sign up that sign up there and that's changed to log in.
So the only thing that remains is to allow us to switch back to logging mode if necessary.
So if logging mode is not active then we'll make it active by setting the value of log in active to
1 or set the modal title back to log in the log in sign up button to log in and then toggle logging
back to sign up.
All right let's take a look.
So sign up becomes log in log in.
Wonderful OK.
Now we just need to action the log in or sign up process.
Now because we've got this nice setup here we're going to do this using Ajax.
So let's do it.
So back over in fitted up HP we want this to happen when they log in or sign up.
Button is clicked
say let's get that all setup
here we go.
Because I like to be sure before I write complicated J query we get wonderful SO IN ORDER TO POST SUBMIT
our form we're going to need a script to submit to.
So I'm going to create a new file called actions dot P BHP
which is going to be where we do things like post a tweet or submit a logging form to actions is gonna
be pretty simple.
It's going to include functions that BHP and then it will route the action to the necessary function
depending on what is being requested at the time.
So if we go back to our Ajax then we just need to do our ajax POST
AND THIS IS GONNA BE get done with a type of post
the U.R.L. is going to be action dot BHP and then question mark.
Action equals I'll call it log in sign up because we don't know which one that is at this point then
that should be a comma and then the data that we're going to send is email and that's gonna be equal
say
the value of
the email field
plus the password
which is going to be equal to say
the value of the password field
and that call should have an end symbol the
and we also want to know if the log in active is true because we want to know whether we're attempting
to log in or sign up this user is equal to and then
log in active Val.
So that's our data then we want to have a success function so this is gonna be a function with a result
and for now we'll just alert the result.
All right.
So fingers crossed that's all gonna work.
Okay now notice I chose action is equal to log in sign up in the UI well.
So if we go over to actions that BHP and then we'll check to see if
they get variable action is equal to a log in sign up.
That means we want a log in or sign up then.
For now all I'm going to do
is display all the post variables which should then be fed back to fitted up BHP and alerted here and
just before we run that.
It would help if I get the U.R.L. right should be actions.
Top BHP okay.
So let's refresh.
Log in and sign up and then click.
Log in and there we go.
We're getting the output from the action dot page P script.
Let's just put in an email address and a password and they are getting fed through as well.
Wonderful.
So now we're going to be concentrating on actions not BHP.
And this is where it will first attempt to sign the user up and then we'll write the code for logging
the user in generally makes sense to do it that way round because we need to sign users up before we
log them in.
So let's have a look.
So log in active is zero there.
So let's do a check to see if post log in active
is 0
then let's echo sign user up and the nice thing about testing this.
We don't need to refresh anything.
We can just click that and it will buy Ajax get the result for us.
Great.
Now before we actually do the log in though we're going to need to validate the email address and the
password and we'll need to do that regardless of whether they're logging in or signing up.
So let's do this at the beginning here.
So first off we'll check to see if there's no
email and in fact what we'll do is we'll set up I won't call it message or call it error so I'll have
an empty error
variable.
So if there's no email address we'll echo an email address is required
else we'll then check to see if there's a password
in fact we went echo that will set error equal to it.
A password is required and we'll do a quick bit of validation on the email as well.
We've done this before but we'll do a quick search for P Pate validate email address and there's a built
in HP function to do that
so let's grab that code
and we actually want to check if it is not a valid email address so I'm gonna get rid of the exclamation
mark then and what we want to check is not the password but the email
so if that turns out to be false then we'll set error see Please enter a valid email address
and then here we'll check to see if there is not an empty string.
Then for now we'll just echo it.
So let's have a look.
If we get rid of the email and click sign up and email addresses required.
Great.
We put that in.
But get rid of the password.
We get a password is required.
Great.
If we put that in.
Yep it's needing a valid email address.
And if we validate that then we just get signed user up.
Perfect.
We'll get our form to display that more nicely in a minute but let's just complete the sign up process
for now
okay.
So now we're going to need our database at long last.
Or our model so let's scroll down here and we can see our Twitter database that we've connected.
Let's click manage then that will take us over to PSP HP my admin and we can create our users table
which is going to be pretty simple.
We're gonna need a user name or the email address the password and an I.D. field.
And for now that's it.
So three columns will have the I.D. column first which we want to auto increment and we want that to
be the primary key and then we'll have email and password both of which I'll set to text all right.
Now before we can do anything with that we're going to need a connection string so I'm going to put
that into functions dot BHP because that appears in all of our scripts
and we'll do that using code that we saw in the My School section.
So we'll create a link which is gonna be my askew ally underscore connect and the database is on the
same server as the scripts that we're writing here.
So I'm going to use local host to connect and then we want the database username which is the same as
the database name itself.
So S.L. 29 hyphen Twitter.
Try not to select any of the whitespace
and then we want the password which I'll copy in a minute and then we want the database name which is
again S.L. twenty nine hyphen Twitter
and the password is that and a et cetera et cetera
and then we'll do a check to see if my askew out high connect error number.
So if there's a connection error
for now just to make sure everything is connected up I'm just going to
print the my askew ally.
Connect
era
and exit.
So stop the script and in fact I'm going to enforce an error by getting the database name wrong.
And if we then refresh that you can see we've got access denied.
Great.
If we get rid of that it should light our page without any problems.
Wonderful okay.
So back to action stop BHP
I'm actually going to make it so that if there is an error there.
Not only do we echo the error but we exit because we shouldn't try to assign the user up if we've got
a problem.
Okay.
And we need to check for here is when we're trying to sign the user up is to make sure that there's
no one with their email address already registered.
So let's write our query or create a query and I'll just give us a bit more room to work with.
So we want to select start everything from users.
Remember we're selecting from the
users table that we just created
where email equals and then we want
my askew ally real escape string.
Remember we need to protect ourselves from potential askew l injection attacks here and we'll do that
with our link and the variable that we actually want to put in his the post email variable
and I'll pop a limit one on the end.
Just forget habit.
Not that we should expect to see more than one.
Then we'll get our results.
Just gonna be my askew ally.
Query
link and query
and then all we want to do is to see if there are any results for this particular query and we can do
that by checking
my rescue out.
I num rows for that result.
And if it's greater than 0 then we'll set.
Error equals that email address is already taken.
And then right at the end here
we'll have a check to see if the error is non empty and if it is then display it.
I think I'd like to check that.
So
that's first off just pop back into sign up mode click sign up and excellent.
That is working as required and then I'm just going to put in a random email address select it and then
enter it manually into our users table
every game.
So now if we browse we've got our email there.
So if I try and add that email address should give me an error.
It's giving me a blank result.
And that's because of course this should be equal zero.
So if we get no results that's when we want that error to appear.
And I think that's because I've got a slight issue with my brackets here.
So I should close brackets there rather than at the end of the string.
Try that again.
So jump back over to Chrome click sign up and that e-mail address is already taken.
Wonderful.
And if I just change the email address I don't get that error.
So that's looking good get
so if
that's not the case let's create the user so we'll create a new query which will be inset into users
and we want to create just the email and password
actually we'll use that symbol for these email and password
and this is going to have values
and I'm gonna copy over
that string that which escapes the email and then we also want to escape
the password.
There we go.
And then we'll just check to make sure that we've run that correctly.
So my ask you Ally query with a link and the query string so if that worked
we want to return something to say that it worked.
So what I'm going to do is just echo one and then we'll consider one to be that kind of correct code
that everything's worked.
Okay.
Else we've got an error of
couldn't create use.
And I'll just have something generic like Please try again later
and there's just a couple of issues that I've missed out the single quotes around the password.
And I've also managed to miss that out of my askew I like query that okay.
So let's take a look.
If we now try and sign up this user we get a one.
Fantastic.
And if we try and do it again we should get that e-mail address is already taken.
Brilliant.
Let's just check and make sure that the user is indeed in our database.
So that's very good but we definitely don't want to be storing the passwords in plain text like that.
So let's update our code here.
Before we echo the one to hash the password as we saw in the My School section.
So first off so we can use the My askew ally insert I.D. to generate our hash and I'll do that all in
one query.
So what we're gonna do is update the user's table and we're going to set the password equal C.
And now we're going to do our hashing
so we'll use MDG five and we're going to empty five the M.D. 53rd version of our I.D. which we're gonna
get from my S2 ally in set I.D. from our link.
And then we want to append that to
the password
and we want to do that where the user I.D. is equal to my SKU ally insert I.D. link
and we'll limit one just in case of so that should now save our password as a nice hashed version.
So let's put a B on the end of that and just check.
Okay.
Looks good.
Looks like we've signed the user up.
Let's jump back to Firefox and take a look.
Kay hasn't actually updated anything that's of course because
I haven't actually run the query
every guy.
Let's try that again.
So we'll sign them up with a C this time looking promising
and there we go.
We've got a nicely securely hashed password.
Wonderful.
So we're pretty close.
We can now sign users up let's just log them in.
So this was the log in active if statement which I can just check ends there.
So
if log in active is a one or is not zero then we're going to try and log the users in.
So I'm actually going to use the same query as before to find the users to find the user by their email
address.
But this time I actually want to get a result so I'm gonna set ro equal to my rescue while I fetch
associated and I want to select the res or really just one row associated with that result and then
if the password in that right is equal to and then I'm gonna be my M.D. five hashing again this time
we want to empty five not the my my askew ally insert I.D. but the row I.D.
like that so we're gonna take the row I.D. MDG 5 that and append the posted password to that MDG 5 that
and that should all equal these saved password if they've entered their password correctly.
So if that's the case.
Echo one else we'll have an error
could not find that username slash password combination please try again.
All right.
So let's take a look.
If we now attempt to log the user in instead of signing them up
and often the simplest things I forgot the dollar sign in front of my error that and of course I don't
actually need
curly brackets around that.
I was thinking of having an if statement there in front of my right but we don't need that because we're
gonna have this error either way whether it finds a row or not.
All right let's try that again.
There we go.
So we've got a one that because we've got a correct log in.
If I change the password then we get an error message
fabulous.
So we're pretty close now we've got sign up and logging working.
There are two things that remain.
The first is that we need to show the user some friendly error messages and actually do the logging
in and signing up and then finally we need to add the possibility to log out as well.
So here we go for the friendly error messages.
We're going to do that in footer BHP here and then instead of just alerting results we're going to test
to see if result is equal to 1
and all I'm going to do here is redirect them to the home page because they will already be logged in
so I'm going to do that using window dot location dot a sign and then the full home page that
and if that's not the case that's display the error message in a friendly way
so that's gonna be actually it's in footer as well isn't it because the model is up here we'll put it
just above the email field so we'll have
in the motel body.
Hey Dave with a class of alert and alert danger
and an I.D. of log in alert
and initially we'll set a going to alert to be hidden.
So I will just set the display to be.
And then down and fix it up BHP
if the response is not one then
we'll find log in alert and we'll set the HMO to whatever the result is and we'll show it.
So we'll make it display
all right.
Let's have a look.
So if I try and log in with something empty then we get a decent response fantastic.
That's just for a couple of days couldn't find that username password combination.
Wonderful displaying the error message very nicely.
So now I'm going to attempt to sign up with a new email address and that should redirect me to the main
page.
Fabulous.
So that's now showing nicely to the user.
We are going to need to actually do the log in.
That's gonna be pretty easy at the beginning of functions dot BHP I'm gonna call a session start and
then in actions dot BHP will set the session I.D. to be equal to in that case my ask you Ally insert
I.D.
link and down here we'll set these session I.D. to be right I.D. So with that we should create a session
which tells us that the user is logged in and then over in headed up BHP we're going to do our final
bit which is to change the code of this button to log out if the user is logged in.
So round here I'm gonna initially cheat and just display the session variable
so now if I sign up
I'll just choose Rob at Rob dot com and then a password and then sign up.
And interestingly we've got the idea variable but it's set to zero.
I suspect that's because we've called a number query here.
So what I'm gonna do is actually set the session I.D. here and then to keep everything the same I'll
use session I.D. instead of my SKU ally inset I.D. in the query
okay.
Let's try that again.
So log in.
Sign up on our B rope to at Rob dot com password log in.
Quite right.
I wanted to sign up and there we go.
So that's got our I.D. working for us.
So now it's just a matter of checking here.
To see if
we've got a session I.D.
And if we have
we're going to need a logout button.
So initially just copy that
to logged out and we'll fix that in a moment but if we're not logged in then we'll have the same old
button
as before
OK.
So to log out I'm going to change this to a link and we're not gonna be using a modem or anything here.
We're just going to link to question mark function is equal to log out
and then close our link so before we write the log out function let's just refresh that and we do indeed
have a log out page log out link sorry and then over in functions that BHP and I looked for function
is log out there.
So it functions dot BHP will have if
they get variable function is equal to log out
and then we'll just use session on set.
And that should unset all of our session variables.
So now if we click the log out button nothing happens.
Not to worry.
That's because I've gotten to add eight ref to my attribute nine.
So let's try that again log out then that should reload the home page and you can see we've now got
the log in sign up button so the user is definitely logged out.
Phew.
So it took us quite a while to get there but we now have a very general purpose page with a neat log
in and sign up system which works and it's secure and the users can sign up log in and log out very
simply.
So I think that's time sir.
And this video here and we'll begin in the next one to start creating the home page for our users.